.. include:: ../Plugin/_plugin_substitutions_p05x.repl
.. _P052_page:

|P052_typename|
==================================================

|P052_shortinfo|

Plugin details
--------------

Type: |P052_type|

Port Type: |P052_porttype|

Name: |P052_name|

Status: |P052_status|

GitHub: |P052_github|_

Maintainer: |P052_maintainer|

Used libraries: |P052_usedlibraries|

Description
-----------

SenseAir is a Swedish manufacturer known for their CO2 sensors.

Below, in the "Supported Hardware" section, are links to a number of their sensors.

CO2 is a gas which we humans exhale. It is also formed as a by-product from burning any carbon based substance.
For example, burning gas or wood.

It is important to keep CO2 levels low to create a healthy indoor climate.
Typically one would aim for an indoor CO2 concentration of less than 700 ppm.

The outdoor global CO2 levels are about 411 ppm and rising quite fast.


Calibration
-----------

As with any sensor, CO2 sensors need calibration.
That's why CO2 sensors are calibrated at the factory using highly specialized chambers with full control of the air entering those chambers.

.. warning:: Do NOT!!! try to calibrate using the bCAL pin on the CO2 sensor, unless you know what you're doing.
  Many sensors may already have been destroyed or at least have their factory calibration cleared by improper calibration.

CO2 sensors have at least two important calibration points:

* 0 ppm, where the sensor is placed in a gas which contains no CO2.
* 400 ppm, which is an approximation of the global CO2 levels (sadly already outdated).

Apparently a number of sites and/or blogs instruct users to pull the bCAL pin to GND for a certain amount of time.
On SenseAir sensors, this may trigger one of these calibration points to be set:

* 4 ... 8 seconds: The current CO2 levels will be assumed to be the new "400 ppm" level.
* 16+ seconds: The current CO2 levels will be assumed to be the new "0 ppm" level.

As may be clear from the warning above, one should **NOT** try to do this!!

It is very hard to create a proper 400 ppm CO2 concentration as simply breathing near the sensor will cause a significant rise in CO2 concentration.

Other factors affecting the CO2 levels:

* Industrial areas.
* Busy roads.
* Being in a city.
* Near plants while the sun has set. (plants convert CO2 into O2 due to sunlight, but this process reverses while the sun has set)
* Close to something burning. (e.g. cooking using gas, burning candles, wood fire, etc.)
* Living creatures, like humans or animals.

A NDIR CO2 sensor generates IR light of a specific wave length and measures the absorption of this light.
Thus direct sunlight and/or heat from a stove, heater, etc. may affect CO2 measurements as this is adding extra IR light into the measurement.

CO2 sensors typically have an Automatic Base Calibration mode (sometimes referred to as ABC mode, but it is unsure whether this is a trademarked name).
With this mode enabled, the sensor keeps track of the minimal raw sensor value seen in some time period (e.g. 1 week).
This new value is then considered to be the new 400 ppm value.
SenseAir sensors will not immediately jump to this value if it differs a lot from the current value.
So it may take several weeks (sometimes months) for a sensor to correct an incorrect 400 ppm level calibration.

Therefore, again the warning: **Do NOT perform manual calibration using the bCAL pin**

It may seem a bit strange to put all those warnings here, but it really happens a lot that people immediately start to damage CO2 sensors by trying to calibrate them while there is nothing wrong with the sensors.
It is unclear as to why this happens to CO2 sensors over-and-over again. 
Maybe there is some popular blog out there instructing readers to do so.

But please, **DO NOT CALIBRATE CO2 SENSORS using the bCAL pin**

Supported hardware
------------------

.. .. |P052_usedby|

:ref:`P052_S8_page`

:ref:`P052_S11_page`

:ref:`P052_tSense_K70_page`

Sensor
^^^^^^

See: :ref:`SerialHelper_page`

Commands available
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. include:: P052_commands.repl

.. Events
.. ~~~~~~

.. .. include:: P052_events.repl

Change log
----------

.. versionchanged:: 2.0
  ...

  |added|
  Major overhaul for 2.0 release.

.. versionadded:: 1.0
  ...

  |added|
  Initial release version.


