.. include:: ../Plugin/_plugin_substitutions_p11x.repl
.. _P115_page:

|P115_typename|
==================================================

|P115_shortinfo|

Plugin details
--------------

Type: |P115_type|

Name: |P115_name|

Status: |P115_status|

GitHub: |P115_github|_

Maintainer: |P115_maintainer|

Used libraries: |P115_usedlibraries|

Description
-----------

The MAX1704x are ultra-compact, low-cost, host-side fuel-gauge systems for lithium-ion (Li+) batteries in handheld and portable equipment.

* ``MAX17043``: single lithium cell 
* ``MAX17044``: dual-cell 2S pack.
* ``MAX17048``: single lithium cell
* ``MAX17049``: dual-cell 2S pack.

Datasheets:

* `MAX17043-MAX17044.pdf <https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX17043-MAX17044.pdf>`_
* `MAX17048-MAX17049.pdf <https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX17048-MAX17049.pdf>`_

The MAX17048 & MAX17049 are more sophisticated versions, which support a number of extra features like measuring the change rate in percent per hour to measure load or charge rate.


Configuration
--------------

Device Settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


**Device**: Select the version of the MAX1704x:

* ``MAX17043``
* ``MAX17044`` - 2-cell version of the MAX17043 (full-scale range of 10V)
* ``MAX17048``
* ``MAX17049`` - 2-cell version of the MAX17048

**Alert threshold** : Set the MAX1704x's percentage threshold that will trigger an alert.

**Send Event on Alert** : Send an event, to be used in rules, when the alert is set.  This can be cleared with ``max1704xclearalert``

Values
^^^^^^

* Voltage: The measured voltage of the cell(s).
* State of Charge (SoC): The percentage left of the cell.
* Alert: Whether or not an alert was triggered (e.g. SoC below set threshold)
* Rate: The change rate of the SoC in percent per hour. Negative value is a discharge, positive is charge rate. (MAX17048 & MAX17049 only)

Events
~~~~~~

.. include:: P115_events.repl

Command Summary
---------------

.. include:: P115_commands.repl


Change log
----------

.. versionchanged:: 2.0

  |added| 2021-05-08 Added to main repository as Plugin 115 Energy - Fuel Gauge MAX1704x [TESTING]
