.. include:: ../Plugin/_plugin_substitutions_p12x.repl

.. _P121_page:

|P121_typename|
==================================================

|P121_shortinfo|

Plugin details
--------------

Type: |P121_type|

Name: |P121_name|

Status: |P121_status|

GitHub: |P121_github|_

Maintainer: |P121_maintainer|

Used libraries: |P121_usedlibraries|

Description
-----------

This plugin is the interface to the Adafruit HMC5883L I2C module.

The breakout board will provide x, y and z values. 
For wiring please follow the tutorial at https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-hmc5883l-breakout-triple-axis-magnetometer-compass-sensor/

Supported hardware
------------------

* `Triple-axis Magnetometer (Compass) Board - HMC5883L`_

.. _Triple-axis Magnetometer (Compass) Board - HMC5883L: https://www.adafruit.com/product/1746


Configuration
-------------

* **Name**: A unique name should be entered here.

* **Enabled**: The device can be disabled or enabled. When not enabled the device should not use any resources.

I2C Options 
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The available settings here depend on the build used. At least the **Force Slow I2C speed** option is available, but selections for the I2C Multiplexer can also be shown. For details see the :ref:`Hardware_page`

Device Settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* **DeclinationAngle**: In degree. For getting the heading a correction value need to be entered. Determine the value at https://www.magnetic-declination.com/. If set to 0.00 the direction is slightly off.

Values
^^^^^^

There are 4 values available for this sensor:

* **x**
 
* **y**
 
* **z**

* **dir**

Change log
----------

.. versionchanged:: 1.0
  ...

  |added|
  2021-11-24 Initial release version.





